___
created: 2024-12-07
completed: true
leetcode-index: 153 
link: https://leetcode.com/problems/find-minimum-in-rotated-sorted-array
difficulty: Medium 
___
# Find Minimum in Rotated Sorted Array

## Question
Suppose an array of length `n` sorted in ascending order is rotated between `1` and `n` times. For example, the array `nums = [0,1,2,4,5,6,7]` might become:
- `[4,5,6,7,0,1,2]` if it was rotated `4` times.
- `[0,1,2,4,5,6,7]` if it was rotated `7` times.

Notice that rotating an array `[a[0], a[1], a[2], ..., a[n-1]]` 1 time results in the array `[a[n-1], a[0], a[1], a[2], ..., a[n-2]]`.

Given the sorted rotated array `nums` of unique elements, return *the minimum element of this array*.

You must write an algorithm that runs in `O(log n) time`.

>[!Example]+ Example 1
>**Input**: `nums = [3,4,5,1,2]`
>**Output**: `1`
>**Explanation**: `The original array was [1,2,3,4,5] rotated 3 times.
>`

>[!Example]+ Example 2
>**Input**: `nums = [4,5,6,7,0,1,2]`
>**Output**: `0`
>**Explanation**: `The original array was [0,1,2,4,5,6,7] and it was rotated 4 times.
>`

>[!Example]+ Example 3
>**Input**: `nums = [11,13,15,17]`
>**Output**: `11`
>**Explanation**: `The original array was [11,13,15,17] and it was rotated 4 times. 
>`

>[!warning]+ Constraints
>- `n == nums.length`
>
>- `1 <= n <= 5000`
>
>- `-5000 <= nums[i] <= 5000`
>
>- All the integers of `nums` are unique.
>
>- `nums` is sorted and rotated between `1` and `n` times.
### Hints
>[!Hint]- Hint 1
>Array was originally in ascending order. Now that the array is rotated, there would be a point in the array where there is a small deflection from the increasing sequence. eg. The array would be something like [4, 5, 6, 7, 0, 1, 2].

>[!Hint]- Hint 2
>You can divide the search space into two and see which direction to go.
>Can you think of an algorithm which has O(logN) search complexity?

>[!Hint]- Hint 3
>
>All the elements to the left of inflection point > first element of the array.
>All the elements to the right of inflection point 
>

---
## Solution

### Intuition
There are two general things you want to keep in mind when solving this problem - first, the list was in sorted order at one point so it will be sorted in ascending order up to a certain index and then from that index it will be sorted again, in ascending order, second, this separator that breaks the ascending nature of the list can be anywhere in the list. But essentially, there will be only two sublists that are sorted in ascending order. Therefore, we want to know which sublist we are in when moving the pointers.

### Approach
With what we know about the nature of the list, we can figure out what half of the list we need to search for the smallest element. Basically, we check our designated midpoint value and the number at the left pointer and if the left value is smaller than or equal to the mid value, then set the result to be the minimum between the current result and the left value then search the right half of the list because there is likely a smaller value there. Otherwise, we want to set the result to be the minimum between the result and the midpoint value and then search in the left half of the list.

### Complexity

#### Time complexity
We traverse through the list using a modified version of binary search so the time complexity is O(log n).

#### Space complexity
The space complexity is constant O(1).

### Code
```Python
class Solution:
	def findMin(self, nums: List[int]) -> int:
		res = nums[0]
		
		l, r = 0, len(nums) - 1
		
		while l <= r:
			m = (l + r)//2
			if nums[m] >= nums[l]:
				res = min(res, nums[l])
				l = m + 1
			else:
				res = min(res, nums[m])
				r = m - 1
		
		return res
```